###  Degree Requirements for 6-7\_2024  
 SB in Computer Science and Molecular Biology

Show old EECS subject numbers  

_Required subjects:_ 
* Three **Mathematics and Introductory** subjects:  
 One of6.1000**6.1000 Introduction to Programming and Computer Science**  (,) Prereqs: none Units: 4-0-8 Develops foundational skills in programming and in computational modeling. Covers widely used programming concepts in Python, including mutability, function objects, and object-oriented programming. Introduces algorithmic complexity and some common libraries. Throughout, demonstrates using computation to help understand real-world phenomena; topics include optimization problems, building simulations, and statistical modeling. Intended for students with at least some prior exposure to programming. Students with no programming experience are encouraged to take 6.100A and 6.100B (or 16.C20) over two terms., 6.100A6.0001**6.100A Introduction to Computer Science Programming in Python**  (,) Prereqs: none Units: 2-0-4 Introduction to computer science and programming. Students develop skills to program and use computational techniques to solve problems. Topics include: the notion of computation, Python, simple algorithms and data structures, object-oriented programming, testing and debugging, and algorithmic complexity. Lectures are viewed outside of class; in-class time is dedicated to problem-solving and discussion. Combination of 6.100A and 6.100B (or 16.C20) counts as REST subject., 6.10206.031**6.1020 Software Construction**  () Prereqs: 6.1010 Units: 3-0-12 Introduces fundamental principles and techniques of software development: how to write software that is safe from bugs, easy to understand, and ready for change. Topics include specifications and invariants; testing, test-case generation, and coverage; abstract data types and representation independence; design patterns for object-oriented programming; concurrent programming, including message passing and shared memory concurrency, and defending against races and deadlock; and functional programming with immutable data and higher-order functions. Includes weekly programming exercises and larger group programming projects.  
 One of6.12006.042**6.1200 Mathematics for Computer Science**  (,) (Same subject as 18.062) Prereqs: GIR:CAL1 Units: 5-0-7 Elementary discrete mathematics for science and engineering, with a focus on mathematical tools and proof techniques useful in computer science. Topics include logical notation, sets, relations, elementary graph theory, state machines and invariants, induction and proofs by contradiction, recurrences, asymptotic notation, elementary analysis of algorithms, elementary number theory and cryptography, permutations and combinations, counting tools, and discrete probability., 6.120A6.042A**6.120A Discrete Mathematics and Proof for Computer Science**  () Prereqs: GIR:CAL1 Units: 3-0-3 Subset of elementary discrete mathematics for science and engineering useful in computer science. Topics may include logical notation, sets, done relations, elementary graph theory, state machines and invariants, induction and proofs by contradiction, recurrences, asymptotic notation, elementary analysis of algorithms, elementary number theory and cryptography, permutations and combinations, counting tools.  
 One of18.06**18.06 Linear Algebra**  () Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 4-0-8 Basic subject on matrix theory and linear algebra, emphasizing topics useful in other disciplines, including systems of equations, vector spaces, determinants, eigenvalues, singular value decomposition, and positive definite matrices. Applications to least-squares approximations, stability of differential equations, networks, Fourier transforms, and Markov processes. Uses linear algebra software. Compared with 18.700, more emphasis on matrix algorithms and many applications., 18.C06**18.C06 Linear Algebra and Optimization**  () (Same subject as 6.C06) Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 5-0-7 Introductory course in linear algebra and optimization, assuming no prior exposure to linear algebra and starting from the basics, including vectors, matrices, eigenvalues, singular values, and least squares. Covers the basics in optimization including convex optimization, linear/quadratic programming, gradient descent, and regularization, building on insights from linear algebra. Explores a variety of applications in science and engineering, where the tools developed give powerful ways to understand complex systems and also extract structure from data., 6.C06**6.C06 Linear Algebra and Optimization**  () (Same subject as 18.C06) Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 5-0-7 Introductory course in linear algebra and optimization, assuming no prior exposure to linear algebra and starting from the basics, including vectors, matrices, eigenvalues, singular values, and least squares. Covers the basics in optimization including convex optimization, linear/quadratic programming, gradient descent, and regularization, building on insights from linear algebra. Explores a variety of applications in science and engineering, where the tools developed give powerful ways to understand complex systems and also extract structure from data.
* Two **Chemistry** subjects:  
 One of5.12**5.12 Organic Chemistry I**  (,) Prereqs: GIR:CHEM Units: 5-0-7 Introduction to organic chemistry. Development of basic principles to understand the structure and reactivity of organic molecules. Emphasis on substitution and elimination reactions and chemistry of the carbonyl group. Introduction to the chemistry of aromatic compounds., CC.512**CC.512 Organic Chemistry I**  () Prereqs/\[Coreqs\]: GIR:CHEM; \[CC.010, CC.011, or CC.A10\] Units: 5-0-7 Equivalent to 5.12; See 5.12 for description. Limited to 25\. Non-Concourse students require permission to join.  
5.601**5.601 Thermodynamics I**  (,) Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 and GIR:CHEM Units: 2-0-4 Basic thermodynamics: state of a system, state variables. Work, heat, first law of thermodynamics, thermochemistry. Second and third law of thermodynamics: entropy and free energy, including the molecular basis for these thermodynamic functions. Equilibrium properties of macroscopic systems. Special attention to thermodynamics related to global energy issues and biological systems. Combination of 5.601 and 5.602 counts as a REST subject.
* One **Introductory Lab** subject:  
20.109**20.109 Laboratory Fundamentals in Biological Engineering**  (,) Prereqs: GIR:BIOL, GIR:CHEM, 6.100B, 18.03, and 20.110 Units: 2-8-5 Introduces experimental biochemical and molecular techniques from a quantitative engineering perspective. Experimental design, data analysis, and scientific communication form the underpinnings of this subject. In this, students complete discovery-based experimental modules drawn from current technologies and active research projects of BE faculty. Generally, topics include DNA engineering, in which students design, construct, and use genetic material; parts engineering, emphasizing protein design and quantitative assessment of protein performance; systems engineering, which considers genome-wide consequences of genetic perturbations; and biomaterials engineering, in which students use biologically-encoded devices to design and build materials. Enrollment limited; priority to Course 20 majors., 7.002**7.002 Fundamentals of Experimental Molecular Biology**  (,) Prereqs: GIR:BIOL or permission of instructor Units: 1-4-1 Introduces the experimental concepts and methods of molecular biology. Covers basic principles of experimental design and data analysis, with an emphasis on the acquisition of practical laboratory experience. Satisfies 6 units of Institute Laboratory credit. Satisfies biology laboratory credit for pre-health professions. Enrollment limited.&7.003**7.003 Applied Molecular Biology Laboratory**  (,) (Same subject as 10.7003) Prereqs: 7.002 Units: 2-7-3 Laboratory-based exploration of modern experimental molecular biology. Specific experimental system studied may vary from term to term, depending on instructor. Emphasizes concepts of experimental design, data analysis and communication in biology and how these concepts are applied in the biotechnology industry. Satisfies 6 units of Institute Laboratory credit. Enrollment limited; admittance may be controlled by lottery.
* Three **Computer Science Foundation** subjects:  
6.10106.009**6.1010 Fundamentals of Programming**  (,) Prereqs: 6.1000 or (6.100A and (6.100B or 16.C20)) Units: 2-4-6 Introduces fundamental concepts of programming. Designed to develop skills in applying basic methods from programming languages to abstract problems. Topics include programming and Python basics, computational concepts, software engineering, algorithmic techniques, data types, and recursion. Lab component consists of software design, construction, and implementation of design. Enrollment may be limited.  
6.12106.006**6.1210 Introduction to Algorithms**  (,) Prereqs: 6.100A and (6.1200 or (6.120A and (6.3700, 6.3800, 18.05, or 18.600))) Units: 5-0-7 Introduction to mathematical modeling of computational problems, as well as common algorithms, algorithmic paradigms, and data structures used to solve these problems. Emphasizes the relationship between algorithms and programming, and introduces basic performance measures and analysis techniques for these problems. Enrollment may be limited.  
 One of6.39006.036**6.3900 Introduction to Machine Learning**  (,) Prereqs: (6.1000 or 6.1210) and (18.03 or 18.06) Units: 4-0-8 Introduction to the principles and algorithms of machine learning from an optimization perspective. Topics include linear and non-linear models for supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning, with a focus on gradient-based methods and neural-network architectures. Previous experience with algorithms may be helpful., 6.C01**6.C01 Modeling with Machine Learning: from Algorithms to Applications**  () Prereqs/\[Coreqs\]: GIR:CAL2 and 6.100A; \[1.C01, 2.C01, 3.C01, 6.C011, 7.C01, 15.C01, or 22.C01\] Units: 2-0-4 Focuses on modeling with machine learning methods with an eye towards applications in engineering and sciences. Introduction to modern machine learning methods, from supervised to unsupervised models, with an emphasis on newer neural approaches. Emphasis on the understanding of how and why the methods work from the point of view of modeling, and when they are applicable. Using concrete examples, covers formulation of machine learning tasks, adapting and extending methods to given problems, and how the methods can and should be evaluated. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. Students cannot receive credit without completion of a 6-unit disciplinary module in the same semester.
* Three **Biological Science Fundation** subjects:  
7.03**7.03 Genetics**  (,) Prereqs: GIR:BIOL Units: 4-0-8 The principles of genetics with application to the study of biological function at the level of molecules, cells, and multicellular organisms, including humans. Structure and function of genes, chromosomes, and genomes. Biological variation resulting from recombination, mutation, and selection. Population genetics. Use of genetic methods to analyze protein function, gene regulation, and inherited disease.  
 One of5.07**5.07 Introduction to Biological Chemistry**  () (Same subject as 20.507) Prereqs: 5.12 Units: 5-0-7 Chemical and physical properties of the cell and its building blocks. Structures of proteins and principles of catalysis. The chemistry of organic/inorganic cofactors required for chemical transformations within the cell. Basic principles of metabolism and regulation in pathways, including glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, fatty acid synthesis/degradation, pentose phosphate pathway, Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, DNA replication, and transcription and translation., 7.05**7.05 General Biochemistry**  () Prereqs: (GIR:BIOL and 5.12) or permission of instructor Units: 5-0-7 Contributions of biochemistry toward an understanding of the structure and functioning of organisms, tissues, and cells. Chemistry and functions of constituents of cells and tissues and the chemical and physical-chemical basis for the structures of nucleic acids, proteins, and carbohydrates. Basic enzymology and biochemical reaction mechanisms involved in macromolecular synthesis and degradation, signaling, transport, and movement. General metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and nitrogen-containing materials such as amino acids, proteins, and related compounds.  
7.06**7.06 Cell Biology**  (,) Prereqs: 7.03 and 7.05 Units: 4-0-8 Presents the biology of cells of higher organisms. Studies the structure, function, and biosynthesis of cellular membranes and organelles; cell growth and oncogenic transformation; transport, receptors, and cell signaling; the cytoskeleton, the extracellular matrix, and cell movements; cell division and cell cycle; functions of specialized cell types. Emphasizes the current molecular knowledge of cell biological processes as well as the genetic, biochemical, and other experimental approaches that resulted in these discoveries.
* One **Technical Communication** subject:  
| [6.UAR**6.UAR Seminar in Undergraduate Advanced Research**  (,) (Same subject as 2.UAR) Prereqs: Permission of instructor Units: 2-0-4 Instruction in effective undergraduate research, including choosing and developing a research topic, surveying previous work and publications, research topics in EECS and the School of Engineering, industry best practices, design for robustness, technical presentation, authorship and collaboration, and ethics. Students engage in extensive written and oral communication exercises, in the context of an approved advanced research project. A total of 12 units of credit is awarded for completion of the fall and subsequent spring term offerings. Application required; consult EECS SuperUROP website for more information.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.UAR)[6.UAT**6.UAT Oral Communication**  (,) Prereqs: none Units: 3-0-6 Provides instruction in aspects of effective technical oral presentations and exposure to communication skills useful in a workplace setting. Students create, give and revise a number of presentations of varying length targeting a range of different audiences.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.UAT)[7.19**7.19 Communication in Experimental Biology**  (,) Prereqs: (7.06 and (5.362, 7.003, or 20.109)) or permission of instructor Units: 4-4-4 Students carry out independent literature research. Journal club discussions are used to help students evaluate and write scientific papers. Instruction and practice in written and oral communication is provided. ](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.19)[9.12**9.12 Experimental Molecular Neurobiology**  () Prereqs: GIR:BIOL and 9.01 Units: 2-4-6 Experimental techniques in cellular and molecular neurobiology. Designed for students without previous experience in techniques of cellular and molecular biology. Experimental approaches include DNA manipulation, molecular cloning, protein biochemistry, dissection and culture of brain cells, synaptic protein analysis, immunocytochemistry, and fluorescent microscopy. One lab session plus one paper review session per week. Instruction and practice in written communication provided. Enrollment limited.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=9.12) |  

* One **Computational Biology Elective** subject:  
 One from the COMPBIOv2 list
* Two **Restricted Elective** subjects:  
 Two from the BIOREv2, AI+D\_AUS, grad\_AI+D\_AUS, or COMPBIOv2 list
_Notes:_ 
* You must follow these requirements if you entered MIT in Fall 2024 or later.
* Includes subjects as of Fall 2026
* Each completed subject can only be used to satisfy at most one _required_ subject but can be used to satisfy multiple _additional constraints_.
* : only offered fall term  
: only offered spring term  
grey: not offered this academic year.
* The prerequisites for 6.1210 can be satisfied in two different ways:  
   * take 6.100A (6 units) and 6.1200 (12 units), or  
   * take 6.100A (6 units) and 6.120A (6 units) and one of the following probability courses: 6.3700, 6.3800, 18.05, or 18.600 (all 12 units). You can petition to use the required probability course as one of the two restricted electives, provided that the second restricted elective is from Course 7.

### Subject Lists

**AI+D\_AUS**: Advanced undergraduate subjects for 6-4 students. Also see the **grad\_AI+D\_AUS** list.  

| [18.404**18.404 Theory of Computation**  () Prereqs: 6.1200 or 18.200 Units: 4-0-8 A more extensive and theoretical treatment of the material in 6.1400J/18.400J, emphasizing computability and computational complexity theory. Regular and context-free languages. Decidable and undecidable problems, reducibility, recursive function theory. Time and space measures on computation, completeness, hierarchy theorems, inherently complex problems, oracles, probabilistic computation, and interactive proof systems.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=18.404)[6.30206.187**6.3020 Fundamentals of Music Processing**  () (Same subject as 21M.387) Prereqs: 6.3000 and 21M.051 Units: 3-0-9 Analyzes recorded music in digital audio form using advanced signal processing and optimization techniques to understand higher-level musical meaning. Covers fundamental tools like windowing, feature extraction, discrete and short-time Fourier transforms, chromagrams, and onset detection. Addresses analysis methods including dynamic time warping, dynamic programming, self-similarity matrices, and matrix factorization. Explores a variety of applications, such as event classification, audio alignment, chord recognition, structural analysis, tempo and beat tracking, content-based audio retrieval, and audio decomposition. Students taking graduate version complete different assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.3020)[6.37306.419**6.3730 Statistics, Computation and Applications**  () (Same subject as 2.092, IDS.012) Prereqs: (6.100B, (18.03, 18.06, or 18.C06), and (6.3700, 6.3800, 14.30, 16.09, or 18.05)) or permission of instructor Units: 3-1-8 Hands-on analysis of data demonstrates the interplay between statistics and computation. Includes four modules, each centered on a specific data set, and introduced by a domain expert. Provides instruction in specific, relevant analysis methods and corresponding algorithmic aspects. Potential modules may include medical data, gene regulation, social networks, finance data (time series), traffic, transportation, weather forecasting, policy, or industrial web applications. Projects address a large-scale data analysis question. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. Enrollment limited; priority to Statistics and Data Science minors, and to juniors and seniors.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.3730)[6.3930**6.3930 AI and Decision Making in Medicine: From Disease to Therapy**  () Prereqs: 6.100A and 6.C01 Units: 3-0-9 Introduction to fundamental principles and applications of artificial intelligence (AI) in medicine and medical research. Introduces foundational concepts in machine learning as they pertain to clinical decision support systems, personalized medicine, and advanced computational methods for drug optimization and protein folding. Stresses the interplay of clinical reasoning, risk stratification, and the design of novel therapeutics. Problem sets integrate theoretical knowledge and practical applications based on concrete problems in both medical and pharmaceutical science. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.3930) | [6.42106.800**6.4210 Robotic Manipulation**  () Prereqs: (6.100A and 6.3900) or permission of instructor Units: 4-2-9 Introduces the fundamental algorithmic approaches for creating robot systems that can autonomously manipulate physical objects in unstructured environments such as homes and restaurants. Topics include perception (including approaches based on deep learning and approaches based on 3D geometry), planning (robot kinematics and trajectory generation, collision-free motion planning, task-and-motion planning, and planning under uncertainty), as well as dynamics and control (both model-based and learning-based). Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. Students engage in extensive written and oral communication exercises.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.4210)[6.4300**6.4300 Introduction to Computer Vision**  () Prereqs: 6.3900, (18.06 or 18.C06), and (6.1200, 6.3700, 6.3800, 18.05, or 18.600) Units: 4-0-11 Provides an introduction to computer vision, covering topics from early vision to mid- and high-level vision, including low-level image analysis, edge detection, image transformations for image synthesis, methods for 3D scene reconstruction, motion analysis and tracking. Additionally, presents basics of machine learning, convolutional neural networks, and transformers in the context of image and video data for object classification, detection, and segmentation. Includes instruction and practice in written and oral communication.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.4300)[6.4610**6.4610 Natural Language Processing**  () Prereqs: 6.3900, (6.3700 or 6.3800), and (18.06 or 18.C06) Units: 4-0-11 Introduces the study of computational models of human language, covering classical statistical methods, representation learning, and modern deep network models through the lens of language modeling. Students complete a substantial final project, applying or extending these methods. Instruction and practice in oral and written communication provided.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.4610)[6.51516.905**6.5151 Large-scale Symbolic Systems**  () Prereqs: 6.1010 or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Concepts and techniques for the design and implementation of large software systems that can be adapted to uses not anticipated by the designer. Applications include compilers, computer-algebra systems, deductive systems, and some artificial intelligence applications. Covers means for decoupling goals from strategy, mechanisms for implementing additive data-directed invocation, work with partially-specified entities, and how to manage multiple viewpoints. Topics include combinators, generic operations, pattern matching, pattern-directed invocation, rule systems, backtracking, dependencies, indeterminacy, memoization, constraint propagation, and incremental refinement. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.5151) | [6.58316.814**6.5831 Database Systems**  () Prereqs: ((6.1210 or 6.1220) and (6.1800 or 6.1810)) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Topics related to the engineering and design of database systems, including data models; database and schema design; schema normalization and integrity constraints; query processing; query optimization and cost estimation; transactions; recovery; concurrency control; isolation and consistency; distributed, parallel and heterogeneous databases; adaptive databases; trigger systems; pub-sub systems; semi structured data and XML querying. Lecture and readings from original research papers. Semester-long project and paper. Students taking graduate version complete different assignments. Enrollment may be limited.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.5831)[6.59316.812**6.5931 Hardware Architecture for Deep Learning**  () Prereqs: 6.1910 and (6.3000 or 6.3900) Units: 3-3-6 Introduction to the design and implementation of hardware architectures for efficient processing of deep learning algorithms and tensor algebra in AI systems. Topics include basics of deep learning, optimization principles for programmable platforms, design principles of accelerator architectures, co-optimization of algorithms and hardware (including sparsity) and use of advanced technologies (including memristors and optical computing). Includes labs involving modeling and analysis of hardware architectures, architecting deep learning inference systems, and an open-ended design project. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.5931)[6.74116.405**6.7411 Principles of Digital Communication**  () Prereqs: (6.3000, 6.3100, or 6.3400) and (6.3700, 6.3800, or 18.05) Units: 3-0-9 Covers communications by progressing through signal representation, sampling, quantization, compression, modulation, coding and decoding, medium access control, and queueing and principles of protocols. By providing simplified proofs, seeks to present an integrated, systems-level view of networking and communications while laying the foundations of analysis and design. Lectures are offered online; in-class time is dedicated to recitations, exercises, and weekly group labs. Homework exercises are based on theoretical derivation and software implementation. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7411)[6.83716.815**6.8371 Digital and Computational Photography**  () Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 and 6.1010 Units: 3-0-9 Presents fundamentals and applications of hardware and software techniques used in digital and computational photography, with an emphasis on software methods. Provides sufficient background to implement solutions to photographic challenges and opportunities. Topics include cameras and image formation, image processing and image representations, high-dynamic-range imaging, human visual perception and color, single view 3-D model reconstruction, morphing, data-rich photography, super-resolution, and image-based rendering. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8371) | [6.86116.806**6.8611 Quantitative Methods for Natural Language Processing**  () Prereqs: 6.3900 and (18.06 or 18.C06) Units: 4-0-11 Introduces the study of human language from a computational perspective, including syntactic, semantic and discourse processing models. Emphasizes machine learning methods and algorithms. Uses these methods and models in applications such as syntactic parsing, information extraction, statistical machine translation, dialogue systems. Instruction and practice in oral and written communication provided.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8611)[6.87016.047**6.8701 Computational Biology: Genomes, Networks, Evolution**  () (Same subject as 20.387) Prereqs: (GIR:BIOL, 6.1210, and 6.3700) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Covers the algorithmic and machine learning foundations of computational biology, combining theory with practice. Principles of algorithm design, influential problems and techniques, and analysis of large-scale biological datasets. Topics include (a) genomes: sequence analysis, gene finding, RNA folding, genome alignment and assembly, database search; (b) networks: gene expression analysis, regulatory motifs, biological network analysis; (c) evolution: comparative genomics, phylogenetics, genome duplication, genome rearrangements, evolutionary theory. These are coupled with fundamental algorithmic techniques including: dynamic programming, hashing, Gibbs sampling, expectation maximization, hidden Markov models, stochastic context-free grammars, graph clustering, dimensionality reduction, Bayesian networks.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8701)[6.87116.802**6.8711 Computational Systems Biology: Deep Learning in the Life Sciences**  () (Same subject as 20.390) Prereqs: (6.100B and 7.05) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Presents innovative approaches to computational problems in the life sciences, focusing on deep learning-based approaches with comparisons to conventional methods. Topics include protein-DNA interaction, chromatin accessibility, regulatory variant interpretation, medical image understanding, medical record understanding, therapeutic design, and experiment design (the choice and interpretation of interventions). Focuses on machine learning model selection, robustness, and interpretation. Teams complete a multidisciplinary final research project using TensorFlow or other framework. Provides a comprehensive introduction to each life sciences problem, but relies upon students understanding probabilistic problem formulations. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8711)[6.88016.026**6.8801 Biomedical Signal and Image Processing**  () (Same subject as HST.482) Prereqs: (6.3700 or permission of instructor) and (2.004, 6.3000, 16.002, or 18.085) Units: 3-1-8 Fundamentals of digital signal processing with emphasis on problems in biomedical research and clinical medicine. Basic principles and algorithms for processing both deterministic and random signals. Topics include data acquisition, imaging, filtering, coding, feature extraction, and modeling. Lab projects, performed in MATLAB, provide practical experience in processing physiological data, with examples from cardiology, speech processing, and medical imaging. Lectures cover signal processing topics relevant to the lab exercises, as well as background on the biological signals processed in the labs. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8801) |

  
**BIOREv2**: Biology restricted electives (updated)  

| [20.110**20.110 Thermodynamics of Biomolecular Systems**  () (Same subject as 2.772) Prereqs: (GIR:BIOL, GIR:CAL2, GIR:CHEM, and GIR:PHY1) or permission of instructor Units: 5-0-7 Equilibrium properties of macroscopic and microscopic systems. Basic thermodynamics: state of a system, state variables. Work, heat, first law of thermodynamics, thermochemistry. Second and third law of thermodynamics: entropy and its statistical basis, Gibbs function. Chemical equilibrium of reactions in gas and solution phase. Macromolecular structure and interactions in solution. Driving forces for molecular self-assembly. Binding cooperativity, solvation, titration of macromolecules.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=20.110)[7.08**7.08 Fundamentals of Chemical Biology**  () (Same subject as 5.08) Prereqs: (GIR:BIOL, 5.13, and (5.07 or 7.05)) or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Spanning the fields of biology, chemistry, and engineering, this class introduces students to the principles of chemical biology and the application of chemical and physical methods and reagents to the study and manipulation of biological systems. Topics include nucleic acid structure, recognition, and manipulation; protein folding and stability, and proteostasis; bioorthogonal reactions and activity-based protein profiling; chemical genetics and small-molecule inhibitor screening; fluorescent probes for biological analysis and imaging; and unnatural amino acid mutagenesis. The class will also discuss the logic of dynamic post-translational modification reactions with an emphasis on chemical biology approaches for studying complex processes including glycosylation, phosphorylation, and lipidation. Students taking the graduate version are expected to explore the subject in greater depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.08)[](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.093)[7.093**7.093 Modern Biostatistics**  () Prereqs: 7.03 and 7.05 Units: 2-0-4 Provides a practical introduction to probability and statistics used in modern biology. Topics covered include discrete and continuous probability distributions, statistical modeling, hypothesis testing, independence, conditional probability, multiple test corrections, nonparametric methods, clustering, correlation, linear regression, principal components analysis with applications to high-throughput DNA sequencing, and image data analysis. Homework is in the R programming language, but prior programming experience is not required. Students taking the graduate version are expected to explore the subject in greater depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.093)&[7.094**7.094 Modern Computational Biology**  () Prereqs: 7.03 and 7.05 Units: 2-0-4 Introduces modern methods in computational biology, focusing on DNA/RNA/protein analysis. Topics include next-generation DNA sequencing and sequencing data analysis, RNA-seq (bulk and single-cell), and protein dynamics. Students taking the graduate version are expected to explore the subject in greater depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.094)[7.20**7.20 Human Physiology**  () (Same subject as HST.540) Prereqs: 7.05 Units: 5-0-7 Comprehensive exploration of human physiology, emphasizing the molecular basis and applied aspects of organ function and regulation in health and disease. Includes a review of cell structure and function, as well as the mechanisms by which the endocrine and nervous systems integrate cellular metabolism. Special emphasis on examining the cardiovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, renal, reproductive, and muscular skeletal systems, as well as liver function, drug metabolism, and pharmacogenetics.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.20)[7.21**7.21 Microbial Physiology**  () Prereqs: 7.03 and 7.05 Units: 4-0-8 Biochemical properties of bacteria and other microorganisms that enable them to grow under a variety of conditions. Interaction between bacteria and bacteriophages. Genetic and metabolic regulation of enzyme action and enzyme formation. Structure and function of components of the bacterial cell envelope. Protein secretion with a special emphasis on its various roles in pathogenesis. Additional topics include bioenergetics, symbiosis, quorum sensing, global responses to DNA damage, and biofilms. Students taking the graduate version are expected to explore the subject in greater depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.21)[7.23**7.23 Immunology**  () (Same subject as 20.230) Prereqs: 7.06 Units: 5-0-7 Comprehensive survey of molecular, genetic, and cellular aspects of the immune system. Topics include innate and adaptive immunity; cells and organs of the immune system; hematopoiesis; immunoglobulin, T cell receptor, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins and genes; development and functions of B and T lymphocytes; immune responses to infections and tumors; hypersensitivity, autoimmunity, and immunodeficiencies. Particular attention to the development and function of the immune system as a whole, as studied by modern methods and techniques. Students taking graduate version explore the subject in greater depth, including study of recent primary literature.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.23) | [7.24**7.24 Advanced Concepts in Immunology**  () Prereqs: 7.23 Units: 3-0-9 Provides a comprehensive and intensified understanding of the relevance of the immune system beyond immunity. Focuses on how the immune system intersects with all aspects of body homeostasis/physiology or disease and how the immune system can be manipulated therapeutically. New advances in the intersection of immunology with cancer biology, neurosciences, metabolism, aging, and maternal-fetal immunology or similar explored. Presents new modern methods and techniques applicable beyond immunology. Includes critical analysis and discussion of assigned readings. Students apply principles learned in class to generate a potential research project, presented in a written form. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.24)[7.26**7.26 Molecular Basis of Infectious Disease**  () Prereqs: 7.06 Units: 3-0-9 Focuses on the principles of host-pathogen interactions with an emphasis on infectious diseases of humans. Presents key concepts of pathogenesis through the study of various human pathogens. Includes critical analysis and discussion of assigned readings. Students taking the graduate version are expected to explore the subject in greater depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.26)[7.27**7.27 Principles of Human Disease and Aging**  () Prereqs: 7.06 Units: 4-0-8 Covers modern approaches to human diseases and aging, emphasizing the molecular and cellular basis of genetic diseases, infectious diseases, aging, and cancer. Topics include the genetics of simple and complex traits; karyotypic analysis and positional cloning; genetic diagnosis; evolutionary determination of aging, genetic and molecular aspects of aging, HIV/AIDs and other infectious diseases; the roles of oncogenes and tumor suppressors; the interaction between genetics and environment; animal models of human disease, cancer, and aging; and treatment strategies for diseases and aging. Includes a paper describing novel treatment options for a specific disease chosen by each student.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.27)[7.28**7.28 Molecular Biology**  () Prereqs/\[Coreqs\]: 7.03; \[7.05\] Units: 5-0-7 Detailed analysis of the biochemical mechanisms that control the maintenance, expression, and evolution of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes. Topics covered in lecture and readings of relevant literature include: gene regulation, DNA replication, genetic recombination, and mRNA translation. Logic of experimental design and data analysis emphasized. Presentations include both lectures and group discussions of representative papers from the literature. Students taking the graduate version are expected to explore the subject in greater depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.28)[7.29**7.29 Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology**  () (Same subject as 9.09) Prereqs: 7.05 or 9.01 Units: 4-0-8 Introduction to the structure and function of the nervous system. Emphasizes the cellular properties of neurons and other excitable cells. Includes the structure and biophysical properties of excitable cells, synaptic transmission, neurochemistry, neurodevelopment, integration of information in simple systems, and detection and information coding during sensory transduction.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.29)[7.30**7.30 Fundamentals of Ecology**  () (Same subject as 1.018, 12.031) Prereqs: none Units: 4-0-8 Fundamentals of ecology, considering Earth as an integrated dynamic living system. Coevolution of the biosphere and geosphere, biogeochemical cycles, metabolic diversity, primary productivity, competition and the niche, trophic dynamics and food webs, population growth and limiting factors. Population modeling, global carbon cycle, climate change, geoengineering, theories of resource competition and mutualism, allometric scaling, ecological genomics, niche theory, human population growth. Applied ecology.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.30) | [7.317.31 not found in MIT subject catalog](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.31)[7.32**7.32 Systems Biology**  () Prereqs: (18.03 and 18.05) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Introduction to cellular and population-level systems biology with an emphasis on synthetic biology, modeling of genetic networks, cell-cell interactions, and evolutionary dynamics. Cellular systems include genetic switches and oscillators, network motifs, genetic network evolution, and cellular decision-making. Population-level systems include models of pattern formation, cell-cell communications, and evolutionary systems biology. Students taking graduate version explore the subject in more depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.32)[7.33**7.33 Evolutionary Biology: Concepts, Models and Computation**  () (Same subject as 6.4710) Prereqs: (6.100A and 7.03) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Explores and illustrates how evolution explains biology, with an emphasis on computational model building for analyzing evolutionary data. Covers key concepts of biological evolution, including adaptive evolution, neutral evolution, evolution of sex, genomic conflict, speciation, phylogeny and comparative methods, life's history, coevolution, human evolution, and evolution of disease.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.33)[7.35**7.35 Human Genetics and Genomics**  () Prereqs: 7.06, (7.03 and 7.05), or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Upper-level seminar offering in-depth analysis and engaged discussion of primary literature on the dimensions and phenotypic consequences of variation in human genes, chromosomes, and genomes. Topics include the human genome project; pedigree analysis; mutation and selection; linkage and association studies; medical genetics and disease; sex chromosomes and sex differences; the biology of the germ line; epigenetics, imprinting, and transgenerational inheritance; human origins; and evolutionary and population genetics. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. Limited to 20 total for versions meeting together.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.35)[7.37**7.37 Molecular and Engineering Aspects of Biotechnology**  () (Same subject as 10.441, 20.361) Prereqs: (7.06 and (2.005, 20.110, 3.012, or 5.60)) or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Covers biological and bioengineering principles underlying the development and therapeutic use of recombinant proteins and stem cells; glycoengineering of recombinant proteins; normal and pathological signaling by growth factors and their receptors; receptor trafficking; monoclonal antibodies as therapeutics; protein pharmacology and delivery; stem cell-derived tissues as therapeutics; RNA therapeutics; combinatorial protein engineering; and new antitumor drugs.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.37)[7.371**7.371 Biological and Engineering Principles Underlying Novel Biotherapeutics**  () (Same subject as 20.371) Prereqs: 7.06 Units: 4-0-8 Covers biological and bioengineering principles underlying the development and therapeutic use of recombinant proteins and immune cells. Special attention to monoclonal antibodies and engineered immune system cells as therapeutics; protein- and glyco- engineering to enhance protein function; protein pharmacology and delivery; nucleic acid- based biotherapeutics; generation of functional cells and tissues from embryonic stem cells and iPS cells; and immune cell-cancer cell interactions in cancer immunotherapy.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.371) | [7.38**7.38 Design Principles of Biological Systems**  () Prereqs: 7.06 or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Introduces students to biological control mechanisms governing decision-making and tools to decipher, model, and perturb these mechanisms. Systems presented include signal transduction, cell cycle control, developmental biology, and the immune system. These systems provide examples of feedback and feedforward control, oscillators, kinetic proofreading, spatial and temporal averaging, and pattern formation. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.38)[7.45**7.45 The Hallmarks of Cancer**  () Prereqs/\[Coreqs\]: \[7.06\] Units: 4-0-8 Provides a comprehensive introduction to the fundamentals of cancer biology and cancer treatment. Topics include cancer genetics, genomics, and epigenetics; familial cancer syndromes; signal transduction, cell cycle control, and apoptosis; cancer metabolism; stem cells and cancer; metastasis; cancer immunology and immunotherapy; conventional and molecularly-targeted therapies; and early detection and prevention. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.45)[7.46**7.46 Building with Cells**  () Prereqs: 7.03 and 7.05 Units: 4-0-8 Focuses on fundamental principles of developmental biology by which cells build organs and organisms. Analyzes the pivotal role of stem cells in tissue maintenance or repair, and in treatment of disease. Explores how to integrate this knowledge with engineering tools to construct functional tissue structures. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.46)[7.49**7.49 Developmental Neurobiology**  () (Same subject as 9.18) Prereqs: 7.03, 7.05, 9.01, or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Considers molecular control of neural specification, formation of neuronal connections, construction of neural systems, and the contributions of experience to shaping brain structure and function. Topics include: neural induction and pattern formation, cell lineage and fate determination, neuronal migration, axon guidance, synapse formation and stabilization, activity-dependent development and critical periods, development of behavior. Students taking graduate version complete additional readings that will be addressed in their mid-term and final exams.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.49)[9.17**9.17 Systems Neuroscience Laboratory**  () Prereqs: 9.01 or permission of instructor Units: 2-4-6 Consists of a series of laboratories designed to give students experience with basic techniques for conducting systems neuroscience research. Includes sessions on anatomical, neurophysiological, and data acquisition and analysis techniques, and how these techniques are used to study nervous system function. Involves the use of experimental animals. Assignments include weekly preparation for lab sessions, two major lab reports and a series of basic computer programming tutorials (MATLAB). Instruction and practice in written communication provided. Enrollment limited.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=9.17)[9.26**9.26 Principles and Applications of Genetic Engineering for Biotechnology and Neuroscience**  () (Same subject as 20.205) Prereqs: GIR:BIOL Units: 3-0-9 Covers principles underlying current and future genetic engineering approaches, ranging from single cellular organisms to whole animals. Focuses on development and invention of technologies for engineering biological systems at the genomic level, and applications of engineered biological systems for medical and biotechnological needs, with particular emphasis on genetic manipulation of the nervous system. Design projects by students.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=9.26) |

  
**COMPBIOv2**: Restricted electives in Computational Biology (updated)  

| [1.088**1.088 Genomics and Evolution of Infectious Disease**  () Prereqs: GIR:BIOL and (1.000 or 6.100B) Units: 3-0-9 Provides a thorough introduction to the forces driving infectious disease evolution, practical experience with bioinformatics and computational tools, and discussions of current topics relevant to public health. Topics include mechanisms of genome variation in bacteria and viruses, population genetics, outbreak detection and tracking, strategies to impede the evolution of drug resistance, emergence of new disease, and microbiomes and metagenomics. Discusses primary literature and computational assignments. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=1.088)[18.413**18.413 Introduction to Computational Molecular Biology**  () Prereqs: 6.1210 or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Introduction to computational molecular biology with a focus on the basic computational algorithms used to solve problems in practice. Covers classical techniques in the field for solving problems such as genome sequencing, assembly, and search; detecting genome rearrangements; constructing evolutionary trees; analyzing mass spectrometry data; connecting gene expression to cellular function; and machine learning for drug discovery. Prior knowledge of biology is not required. Particular emphasis on problem solving, collaborative learning, theoretical analysis, and practical implementation of algorithms. Students taking graduate version complete additional and more complex assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=18.413)[6.87016.047**6.8701 Computational Biology: Genomes, Networks, Evolution**  () (Same subject as 20.387) Prereqs: (GIR:BIOL, 6.1210, and 6.3700) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Covers the algorithmic and machine learning foundations of computational biology, combining theory with practice. Principles of algorithm design, influential problems and techniques, and analysis of large-scale biological datasets. Topics include (a) genomes: sequence analysis, gene finding, RNA folding, genome alignment and assembly, database search; (b) networks: gene expression analysis, regulatory motifs, biological network analysis; (c) evolution: comparative genomics, phylogenetics, genome duplication, genome rearrangements, evolutionary theory. These are coupled with fundamental algorithmic techniques including: dynamic programming, hashing, Gibbs sampling, expectation maximization, hidden Markov models, stochastic context-free grammars, graph clustering, dimensionality reduction, Bayesian networks.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8701) | [](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.093)[7.093**7.093 Modern Biostatistics**  () Prereqs: 7.03 and 7.05 Units: 2-0-4 Provides a practical introduction to probability and statistics used in modern biology. Topics covered include discrete and continuous probability distributions, statistical modeling, hypothesis testing, independence, conditional probability, multiple test corrections, nonparametric methods, clustering, correlation, linear regression, principal components analysis with applications to high-throughput DNA sequencing, and image data analysis. Homework is in the R programming language, but prior programming experience is not required. Students taking the graduate version are expected to explore the subject in greater depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.093)&[7.094**7.094 Modern Computational Biology**  () Prereqs: 7.03 and 7.05 Units: 2-0-4 Introduces modern methods in computational biology, focusing on DNA/RNA/protein analysis. Topics include next-generation DNA sequencing and sequencing data analysis, RNA-seq (bulk and single-cell), and protein dynamics. Students taking the graduate version are expected to explore the subject in greater depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.094)[7.32**7.32 Systems Biology**  () Prereqs: (18.03 and 18.05) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Introduction to cellular and population-level systems biology with an emphasis on synthetic biology, modeling of genetic networks, cell-cell interactions, and evolutionary dynamics. Cellular systems include genetic switches and oscillators, network motifs, genetic network evolution, and cellular decision-making. Population-level systems include models of pattern formation, cell-cell communications, and evolutionary systems biology. Students taking graduate version explore the subject in more depth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.32)[7.33**7.33 Evolutionary Biology: Concepts, Models and Computation**  () (Same subject as 6.4710) Prereqs: (6.100A and 7.03) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Explores and illustrates how evolution explains biology, with an emphasis on computational model building for analyzing evolutionary data. Covers key concepts of biological evolution, including adaptive evolution, neutral evolution, evolution of sex, genomic conflict, speciation, phylogeny and comparative methods, life's history, coevolution, human evolution, and evolution of disease.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=7.33) |

  
**grad\_AI+D\_AUS**: Graduate subjects that satisfy the **AI+D\_AUS** or **EECS** requirements  

| [6.3932**6.3932 AI and Decision Making in Medicine: From Disease to Therapy**  () Prereqs: 6.100A and 6.C01 Units: 3-0-9 Introduction to fundamental principles and applications of artificial intelligence (AI) in medicine and medical research. Introduces foundational concepts in machine learning as they pertain to clinical decision support systems, personalized medicine, and advanced computational methods for drug optimization and protein folding. Stresses the interplay of clinical reasoning, risk stratification, and the design of novel therapeutics. Problem sets integrate theoretical knowledge and practical applications based on concrete problems in both medical and pharmaceutical science. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.3932)[6.53406.853**6.5340 Topics in Algorithmic Game Theory**  () Prereqs: 6.1210 or 6.1220 Units: 3-0-9 Presents research topics at the interface of computer science and game theory, with an emphasis on algorithms and computational complexity. Explores the types of game-theoretic tools that are applicable to computer systems, the loss in system performance due to the conflicts of interest of users and administrators, and the design of systems whose performance is robust with respect to conflicts of interest inside the system. Algorithmic focus is on algorithms for equilibria, the complexity of equilibria and fixed points, algorithmic tools in mechanism design, learning in games, and the price of anarchy.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.5340)[6.5940**6.5940 TinyML and Efficient Deep Learning Computing**  () Prereqs: 6.1910 and 6.3900 Units: 3-0-9 Introduces efficient deep learning computing techniques that enable powerful deep learning applications on resource-constrained devices. Topics include model compression, pruning, quantization, neural architecture search, distributed training, data/model parallellism, gradient compression, on-device fine-tuning. It also introduces application-specific acceleration techniques for video recognition, point cloud, and generative AI (diffusion model, LLM). Students will get hands-on experience accelerating deep learning applications with an open-ended design project.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.5940)[6.71006.241**6.7100 Dynamic Systems and Control**  () (Same subject as 16.338) Prereqs: 6.3000 and 18.06 Units: 4-0-8 Linear, discrete- and continuous-time, multi-input-output systems in control, related areas. Least squares and matrix perturbation problems. State-space models, modes, stability, controllability, observability, transfer function matrices, poles and zeros, and minimality. Internal stability of interconnected systems, feedback compensators, state feedback, optimal regulation, observers, and observer-based compensators. Measures of control performance, robustness issues using singular values of transfer functions. Introductory ideas on nonlinear systems. Recommended prerequisite: 6.3100.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7100)[6.72106.251**6.7210 Introduction to Mathematical Programming**  () (Same subject as 15.081) Prereqs: 18.06 Units: 4-0-8 Introduction to linear optimization and its extensions emphasizing both methodology and the underlying mathematical structures and geometrical ideas. Covers classical theory of linear programming as well as some recent advances in the field. Topics: simplex method; duality theory; sensitivity analysis; network flow problems; decomposition; robust optimization; integer programming; interior point algorithms for linear programming; and introduction to combinatorial optimization and NP-completeness.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7210)[6.72206.252**6.7220 Nonlinear Optimization**  () (Same subject as 15.084) Prereqs: 18.06 and (18.100A, 18.100B, or 18.100Q) Units: 4-0-8 Unified analytical and computational approach to nonlinear optimization problems. Unconstrained optimization methods include gradient, conjugate direction, Newton, sub-gradient and first-order methods. Constrained optimization methods include feasible directions, projection, interior point methods, and Lagrange multiplier methods. Convex analysis, Lagrangian relaxation, nondifferentiable optimization, and applications in integer programming. Comprehensive treatment of optimality conditions and Lagrange multipliers. Geometric approach to duality theory. Applications drawn from control, communications, machine learning, and resource allocation problems.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7220)[6.72306.256**6.7230 Algebraic Techniques and Semidefinite Optimization**  () (Same subject as 18.456) Prereqs: 6.7210 or 15.093 Units: 3-0-9 Theory and computational techniques for optimization problems involving polynomial equations and inequalities with particular, emphasis on the connections with semidefinite optimization. Develops algebraic and numerical approaches of general applicability, with a view towards methods that simultaneously incorporate both elements, stressing convexity-based ideas, complexity results, and efficient implementations. Examples from several engineering areas, in particular systems and control applications. Topics include semidefinite programming, resultants/discriminants, hyperbolic polynomials, Groebner bases, quantifier elimination, and sum of squares.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7230)[6.72506.485**6.7250 Optimization for Machine Learning**  () Prereqs: 6.3900 and 18.06 Units: 3-0-9 Optimization algorithms are central to all of machine learning. Covers a variety of topics in optimization, with a focus on non-convex optimization. Focuses on both classical and cutting-edge results, including foundational topics grounded in convexity, complexity theory of first-order methods, stochastic optimization, as well as recent progress in non-Euclidean optimization, deep learning, and beyond. Prepares students to appreciate a broad spectrum of ideas in OPTML, learning to be not only informed users but also gaining exposure to research questions in the area.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7250)[6.72606.268**6.7260 Network Science and Models**  () Prereqs: 6.3702 and 18.06 Units: 3-0-9 Introduces the main mathematical models used to describe large networks and dynamical processes that evolve on networks. Static models of random graphs, preferential attachment, and other graph evolution models. Epidemic propagation, opinion dynamics, social learning, and inference in networks. Applications drawn from social, economic, natural, and infrastructure networks, as well as networked decision systems such as sensor networks.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7260)[6.73006.336**6.7300 Introduction to Modeling and Simulation**  () (Same subject as 2.096, 16.910) Prereqs: 18.03 or 18.06 Units: 3-6-3 Introduction to computational techniques for modeling and simulation of a variety of large and complex engineering, science, and socio-economical systems. Prepares students for practical use and development of computational engineering in their own research and future work. Topics include mathematical formulations (e.g., automatic assembly of constitutive and conservation principles); linear system solvers (sparse and iterative); nonlinear solvers (Newton and homotopy); ordinary, time-periodic and partial differential equation solvers; and model order reduction. Students develop their own models and simulators for self-proposed applications, with an emphasis on creativity, teamwork, and communication. Prior basic linear algebra required and at least one numerical programming language (e.g., MATLAB, Julia, Python, etc.) helpful.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7300)[6.73106.337**6.7310 Introduction to Numerical Methods**  () (Same subject as 18.335) Prereqs: 18.06, 18.700, or 18.701 Units: 3-0-9 Advanced introduction to numerical analysis: accuracy and efficiency of numerical algorithms. In-depth coverage of sparse-matrix/iterative and dense-matrix algorithms in numerical linear algebra (for linear systems and eigenproblems). Floating-point arithmetic, backwards error analysis, conditioning, and stability. Other computational topics (e.g., numerical integration or nonlinear optimization) may also be surveyed. Final project involves some programming.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7310) | [6.73206.338**6.7320 Parallel Computing and Scientific Machine Learning**  () (Same subject as 18.337) Prereqs: 18.06, 18.700, or 18.701 Units: 3-0-9 Introduction to scientific machine learning with an emphasis on developing scalable differentiable programs. Covers scientific computing topics (numerical differential equations, dense and sparse linear algebra, Fourier transformations, parallelization of large-scale scientific simulation) simultaneously with modern data science (machine learning, deep neural networks, automatic differentiation), focusing on the emerging techniques at the connection between these areas, such as neural differential equations and physics-informed deep learning. Provides direct experience with the modern realities of optimizing code performance for supercomputers, GPUs, and multicores in a high-level language.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7320)[6.73306.339**6.7330 Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations**  () (Same subject as 2.097, 16.920) Prereqs: 18.03 or 18.06 Units: 3-0-9 Covers the fundamentals of modern numerical techniques for a wide range of linear and nonlinear elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic partial differential and integral equations. Topics include mathematical formulations; finite difference, finite volume, finite element, and boundary element discretization methods; and direct and iterative solution techniques. The methodologies described form the foundation for computational approaches to engineering systems involving heat transfer, solid mechanics, fluid dynamics, and electromagnetics. Computer assignments requiring programming.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7330)[6.73406.335**6.7340 Fast Methods for Partial Differential and Integral Equations**  () (Same subject as 18.336) Prereqs: 6.7300, 16.920, 18.085, 18.335, or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Unified introduction to the theory and practice of modern, near linear-time, numerical methods for large-scale partial-differential and integral equations. Topics include preconditioned iterative methods; generalized Fast Fourier Transform and other butterfly-based methods; multiresolution approaches, such as multigrid algorithms and hierarchical low-rank matrix decompositions; and low and high frequency Fast Multipole Methods. Example applications include aircraft design, cardiovascular system modeling, electronic structure computation, and tomographic imaging.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7340)[6.7350**6.7350 Numerical Algorithms for Computing and Machine Learning**  () Prereqs: (GIR:CAL2, 6.100A, and 18.C06) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Broad survey of numerical methods used in graphics, vision, robotics, machine learning, and scientific computing, with emphasis on incorporating these algorithms into downstream applications. Focuses on challenges that arise in applying/implementing numerical algorithms and recognizing which numerical methods are relevant to different applications. Topics include numerical linear algebra (QR, LU, SVD matrix factorizations; eigenvectors; conjugate gradients), ordinary and partial differential equations (divided differences, finite element method), and nonlinear systems and optimization (gradient descent, Newton/quasi-Newton methods, gradient-free optimization, constrained optimization). Examples and case studies drawn from the computer science and machine learning literatures.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7350)[6.74706.441**6.7470 Information Theory**  () Prereqs: 6.3700 Units: 3-0-9 Mathematical definitions of information measures, convexity, continuity, and variational properties. Lossless source coding; variable-length and block compression; Slepian-Wolf theorem; ergodic sources and Shannon-McMillan theorem. Hypothesis testing, large deviations and I-projection. Fundamental limits of block coding for noisy channels: capacity, dispersion, finite blocklength bounds. Coding with feedback. Joint source-channel problem. Rate-distortion theory, vector quantizers. Advanced topics include Gelfand-Pinsker problem, multiple access channels, broadcast channels (depending on available time).](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7470)[6.74806.260**6.7480 Information Theory: From Coding to Learning**  () Prereqs: 6.3700, 6.3800, or 18.05 Units: 3-0-9 Introduces fundamentals of information theory and its applications to contemporary problems in statistics, machine learning, and computer science. A thorough study of information measures, including Fisher information, f-divergences, their convex duality, and variational characterizations. Covers information-theoretic treatment of inference, hypothesis testing and large deviations, universal compression, channel coding, lossy compression, and strong data-processing inequalities. Methods are applied to deriving PAC-Bayes bounds, GANs, and regret inequalities in machine learning, parametric and non-parametric estimation in statistics, communication complexity, and computation with noisy gates in computer science. Fast-paced journey through a recent textbook with the same title. For a communication-focused version, consider 6.7470.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7480)[6.77006.436**6.7700 Fundamentals of Probability**  () (Same subject as 15.085) Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 4-0-8 Introduction to probability theory. Probability spaces and measures. Discrete and continuous random variables. Conditioning and independence. Multivariate normal distribution. Abstract integration, expectation, and related convergence results. Moment generating and characteristic functions. Bernoulli and Poisson process. Finite-state Markov chains. Convergence notions and their relations. Limit theorems. Familiarity with elementary probability and real analysis is desirable.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7700)[6.77106.262**6.7710 Discrete Stochastic Processes**  () Prereqs: 6.3702 or 18.204 Units: 4-0-8 Review of probability and laws of large numbers; Poisson counting process and renewal processes; Markov chains (including Markov decision theory), branching processes, birth-death processes, and semi-Markov processes; continuous-time Markov chains and reversibility; random walks, martingales, and large deviations; applications from queueing, communication, control, and operations research.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7710)[6.77206.265**6.7720 Discrete Probability and Stochastic Processes**  () (Same subject as 15.070, 18.619) Prereqs: 6.3702, 6.7700, 18.100A, 18.100B, or 18.100Q Units: 3-0-9 Provides an introduction to tools used for probabilistic reasoning in the context of discrete systems and processes. Tools such as the probabilistic method, first and second moment method, martingales, concentration and correlation inequalities, theory of random graphs, weak convergence, random walks and Brownian motion, branching processes, Markov chains, Markov random fields, correlation decay method, isoperimetry, coupling, influences and other basic tools of modern research in probability will be presented. Algorithmic aspects and connections to statistics and machine learning will be emphasized.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7720)[6.77306.434**6.7730 Modern Mathematical Statistics**  () Prereqs: 18.100A, 18.C06, (6.3700 or 18.600), and (6.3720 or 18.650) Units: 3-0-9 Presents mathematical statistics as a formal language for reasoning about data and uncertainty. Introduction to the basic framework of statistical decision theory, along with core concepts such as sufficiency, Bayes and minimax optimality of statistical procedures, with applications to optimal estimation, hypothesis testing, and prediction. Discussion topics include causality, multiple hypothesis testing, nonparametric and semiparametric statistics, and results for model misspecification. Targeted to students interested in statistical and machine learning research, with an emphasis on proofs and fundamental understanding.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7730)[6.78006.437**6.7800 Inference and Information**  () Prereqs: 6.3700, 6.3800, or 6.7700 Units: 4-0-8 Introduction to principles of Bayesian and non-Bayesian statistical inference and its information theoretic foundations. Hypothesis testing and parameter estimation, sufficient statistics, exponential families. Loss functions, information measures, model capacity, and information geometry. Variational inference and EM algorithm; MCMC and other Monte Carlo methods. Asymptotic analysis and large deviations theory; universal inference and learning. Selected topics such as representation learning, score-matching, diffusion, and nonparametric statistics.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7800) | [6.78106.438**6.7810 Algorithms for Inference**  () Prereqs: 18.06 and (6.3700, 6.3800, or 6.7700) Units: 4-0-8 Introduction to computational aspects of statistical inference via probabilistic graphical models. Directed and undirected graphical models, and factor graphs, over discrete and Gaussian distributions; hidden Markov models, linear dynamical systems. Sum-product and junction tree algorithms; forward-backward algorithm, Kalman filtering and smoothing. Min-sum and Viterbi algorithms. Variational methods, mean-field theory, and loopy belief propagation. Sampling methods; Glauber dynamics and mixing time analysis. Parameter structure learning for graphical models; Baum-Welch and Chow-Liu algorithms. Selected topics such as causal inference, particle filtering, restricted Boltzmann machines, and graph neural networks.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7810)[6.78306.435**6.7830 Bayesian Modeling and Inference**  () Prereqs: 6.7700 and 6.7900 Units: 3-0-9 Covers Bayesian modeling and inference at an advanced graduate level. Topics include de Finetti's theorem, decision theory, approximate inference (modern approaches and analysis of Monte Carlo, variational inference, etc.), hierarchical modeling, (continuous and discrete) nonparametric Bayesian approaches, sensitivity and robustness, and evaluation.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7830)[6.79006.867**6.7900 Machine Learning**  () Prereqs: 18.06 and (6.3700, 6.3800, or 18.600) Units: 3-0-9 Principles, techniques, and algorithms in machine learning from the point of view of statistical inference; representation, generalization, and model selection; and methods such as linear/additive models, active learning, boosting, support vector machines, non-parametric Bayesian methods, hidden Markov models, Bayesian networks, and convolutional and recurrent neural networks. Recommended prerequisite: 6.3900 or other previous experience in machine learning. Enrollment may be limited.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7900)[6.79106.860**6.7910 Statistical Learning Theory and Applications**  () (Same subject as 9.520) Prereqs: 6.3700, 6.7900, 18.06, or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Covers foundations and recent advances in statistical machine learning theory, with the dual goals of providing students with the theoretical knowledge to use machine learning and preparing more advanced students to contribute to progress in the field. The content is roughly divided into three parts. The first part is about classical regularization, margin, stochastic gradient methods, overparametrization, implicit regularization, and stability. The second part is about deep networks: approximation and optimization theory plus roots of generalization. The third part is about the connections between learning theory and the brain. Occasional talks by leading researchers on advanced research topics. Emphasis on current research topics.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7910)[6.7920**6.7920 Reinforcement Learning: Foundations and Methods**  () (Same subject as 1.127, IDS.140) Prereqs: 6.3700 or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Examines reinforcement learning (RL) as a methodology for approximately solving sequential decision-making under uncertainty, with foundations in optimal control and machine learning. Provides a mathematical introduction to RL, including dynamic programming, statistical, and empirical perspectives, and special topics. Core topics include: dynamic programming, special structures, finite and infinite horizon Markov Decision Processes, value and policy iteration, Monte Carlo methods, temporal differences, Q-learning, stochastic approximation, and bandits. Also covers approximate dynamic programming, including value-based methods and policy space methods. Applications and examples drawn from diverse domains. Focus is mathematical, but is supplemented with computational exercises. An analysis prerequisite is suggested but not required; mathematical maturity is necessary.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7920)[6.79306.871**6.7930 Machine Learning for Healthcare**  () (Same subject as HST.956) Prereqs: 6.3900, 6.7810, 6.7900, 6.8611, or 9.520 Units: 4-0-8 Introduces students to machine learning in healthcare, including the nature of clinical data and the use of machine learning for risk stratification, disease progression modeling, precision medicine, diagnosis, subtype discovery, and improving clinical workflows. Topics include causality, interpretability, algorithmic fairness, time-series analysis, graphical models, deep learning and transfer learning. Guest lectures by clinicians from the Boston area, and projects with real clinical data, emphasize subtleties of working with clinical data and translating machine learning into clinical practice.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7930)[6.79406.231**6.7940 Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning**  () Prereqs: 6.3700 or 18.600 Units: 4-0-8 Dynamic programming as a unifying framework for sequential decision-making under uncertainty, Markov decision problems, and stochastic control. Perfect and imperfect state information models. Finite horizon and infinite horizon problems, including discounted and average cost formulations. Value and policy iteration. Suboptimal methods. Approximate dynamic programming for large-scale problems, and reinforcement learning. Applications and examples drawn from diverse domains. While an analysis prerequisite is not required, mathematical maturity is necessary.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7940)[6.7960**6.7960 Deep Learning**  () Prereqs: 18.05 and (6.3720, 6.3900, or 6.C01) Units: 3-0-9 Fundamentals of deep learning, including both theory and applications. Topics include neural net architectures (MLPs, CNNs, RNNs, graph nets, transformers), geometry and invariances in deep learning, backpropagation and automatic differentiation, learning theory and generalization in high-dimensions, and applications to computer vision, natural language processing, and robotics.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7960)[6.7970**6.7970 Symmetry and its Applications to Machine Learning**  () (Same subject as 8.750) Prereqs: 6.100A, 6.1210, and 18.C06 Units: 3-0-9 Introduces group representation theory to design symmetry-preserving machine learning algorithms, emphasizing the connections between mathematics, physics, and data-driven models. Students implement core mathematical concepts in code to construct algorithms that operate on structured data — such as graphs, geometric objects, and scientific datasets — while preserving their underlying symmetries. Topics include finite and infinite groups (with an introduction to Lie algebras), various group representations (regular, reducible, and irreducible), tensor products and decompositions, Fourier analysis and convolutions, statistics and sampling of representation vector spaces, and symmetry-breaking mechanisms. Previous knowledge of group theory is not required but is beneficial.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7970)[6.7980**6.7980 Topics in Multiagent Learning**  () Prereqs: 6.1200, 6.1220, or 15.C571 Units: 3-0-9 Examines the foundations of multi-agent systems from a combined game-theoretic, optimization, and learning-theoretic perspective. Studies settings involving multiple learning agents with distinct objectives, where standard training methods may induce nonstationary or unstable behaviors. Introduces fundamental models including matrix games, stochastic games, and imperfect-information games. Studies modern settings deviating from standard models wherein strategies and utilities are represented using deep neural networks. Presents equilibrium concepts, equilibrium computation methods, and equilibrium learning methods. Studies the complexity of solution concepts. Discusses applications in machine learning, including multi-agent reinforcement learning, adversarial learning, AI-AI interactions, and strategic decision-making systems underlying game-playing agents in domains such as Go, poker, Diplomacy, and Stratego.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7980)[6.82006.484**6.8200 Sensorimotor Learning**  () Prereqs: 6.3900 or 6.7900 Units: 3-0-9 Provides an in-depth view of the state-of-the-art learning methods for control and the know-how of applying these techniques. Topics span reinforcement learning, self-supervised learning, imitation learning, model-based learning, and advanced deep learning architectures, and specific machine learning challenges unique to building sensorimotor systems. Discusses how to identify if learning-based control can help solve a particular problem, how to formulate the problem in the learning framework, and what algorithm to use. Applications of algorithms in robotics, logistics, recommendation systems, playing games, and other control domains covered. Instruction involves two lectures a week, practical experience through exercises, discussion of current research directions, and a group project.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8200) | [6.82106.832**6.8210 Underactuated Robotics**  () Prereqs: 18.03 and 18.06 Units: 3-0-9 Covers nonlinear dynamics and control of underactuated mechanical systems, with an emphasis on computational methods. Topics include the nonlinear dynamics of robotic manipulators, applied optimal and robust control and motion planning. Discussions include examples from biology and applications to legged locomotion, compliant manipulation, underwater robots, and flying machines.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8210)[6.83006.869**6.8300 Advances in Computer Vision**  () Prereqs: 6.7960, (6.1200 or 6.3700), and (18.06 or 18.C06) Units: 3-0-9 Advanced topics in computer vision focusing on geometry in computer vision, including image formation, representation theory for vision, classic multi-view geometry, multi-view geometry in the age of deep learning, differentiable rendering, neural scene representations, correspondence estimation, optical flow computation, and point tracking. Topics include generative modeling and representation learning including image and video generation, guidance in diffusion models, conditional probabilistic models, as well as representation learning in the form of contrastive and masking-based methods. Explores the intersection of robotics and computer vision with "vision for embodied agents," investigating the role of vision for decision-making, planning and control.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8300)[6.83706.865**6.8370 Advanced Computational Photography**  () Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 and 6.1010 Units: 3-0-9 Presents fundamentals and applications of hardware and software techniques used in digital and computational photography, with an emphasis on software methods. Provides sufficient background to implement solutions to photographic challenges and opportunities. Topics include cameras and image formation, image processing and image representations, high-dynamic-range imaging, human visual perception and color, single view 3-D model reconstruction, morphing, data-rich photography, super-resolution, and image-based rendering. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8370)[6.85106.835**6.8510 Intelligent Multimodal User Interfaces**  () Prereqs: (6.1020 and 6.4110) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Implementation and evaluation of intelligent multi-modal user interfaces, taught from a combination of hands-on exercises and papers from the original literature. Topics include basic technologies for handling speech, vision, pen-based interaction, and other modalities, as well as various techniques for combining modalities. Substantial readings and a term project, where students build a program that illustrates one or more of the themes of the course.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8510)[6.86206.345**6.8620 Spoken Language Processing**  () (Same subject as HST.728) Prereqs: 6.3000 and 6.3900 Units: 3-1-8 Introduces the rapidly developing field of spoken language processing including automatic speech recognition. Topics include acoustic theory of speech production, acoustic-phonetics, signal representation, acoustic and language modeling, search, hidden Markov modeling, neural networks models, end-to-end deep learning models, and other machine learning techniques applied to speech and language processing topics. Lecture material intersperses theory with practice. Includes problem sets, laboratory exercises, and open-ended term project.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8620)[6.87106.874**6.8710 Computational Systems Biology: Deep Learning in the Life Sciences**  () (Same subject as HST.506) Prereqs: GIR:BIOL and (6.3700 or 18.600) Units: 3-0-9 Presents innovative approaches to computational problems in the life sciences, focusing on deep learning-based approaches with comparisons to conventional methods. Topics include protein-DNA interaction, chromatin accessibility, regulatory variant interpretation, medical image understanding, medical record understanding, therapeutic design, and experiment design (the choice and interpretation of interventions). Focuses on machine learning model selection, robustness, and interpretation. Teams complete a multidisciplinary final research project using TensorFlow or other framework. Provides a comprehensive introduction to each life sciences problem, but relies upon students understanding probabilistic problem formulations. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8710)[6.88106.556**6.8810 Data Acquisition and Image Reconstruction in MRI**  () (Same subject as HST.580) Prereqs: 6.3010 Units: 3-0-9 Applies analysis of signals and noise in linear systems, sampling, and Fourier properties to magnetic resonance (MR) imaging acquisition and reconstruction. Provides adequate foundation for MR physics to enable study of RF excitation design, efficient Fourier sampling, parallel encoding, reconstruction of non-uniformly sampled data, and the impact of hardware imperfections on reconstruction performance. Surveys active areas of MR research. Assignments include Matlab-based work with real data. Includes visit to a scan site for human MR studies.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8810)[6.8850**6.8850 Clinical Data Learning, Visualization, and Deployments**  () (Same subject as HST.953) Prereqs: (6.7900 and 6.7930) or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Examines the practical considerations for operationalizing machine learning in healthcare settings, with a focus on robust, private, and fair modeling using real retrospective healthcare data. Explores the pre-modeling creation of dataset pipeline to the post-modeling "implementation science," which addresses how models are incorporated at the point of care. Students complete three homework assignments (one each in machine learning, visualization, and implementation), followed by a project proposal and presentation. Students gain experience in dataset creation and curation, machine learning training, visualization, and deployment considerations that target utility and clinical value. Students partner with computer scientists, engineers, social scientists, and clinicians to better appreciate the multidisciplinary nature of data science.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.8850) |