###  Degree Requirements for 6-14\_2017  
 SB in Computer Science, Economics, and Data Science

Show old EECS subject numbers  

_Required subjects:_ 
* Three **math** subjects:  
 One of18.06**18.06 Linear Algebra**  () Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 4-0-8 Basic subject on matrix theory and linear algebra, emphasizing topics useful in other disciplines, including systems of equations, vector spaces, determinants, eigenvalues, singular value decomposition, and positive definite matrices. Applications to least-squares approximations, stability of differential equations, networks, Fourier transforms, and Markov processes. Uses linear algebra software. Compared with 18.700, more emphasis on matrix algorithms and many applications., 18.C06**18.C06 Linear Algebra and Optimization**  () (Same subject as 6.C06) Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 5-0-7 Introductory course in linear algebra and optimization, assuming no prior exposure to linear algebra and starting from the basics, including vectors, matrices, eigenvalues, singular values, and least squares. Covers the basics in optimization including convex optimization, linear/quadratic programming, gradient descent, and regularization, building on insights from linear algebra. Explores a variety of applications in science and engineering, where the tools developed give powerful ways to understand complex systems and also extract structure from data., 6.C06**6.C06 Linear Algebra and Optimization**  () (Same subject as 18.C06) Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 5-0-7 Introductory course in linear algebra and optimization, assuming no prior exposure to linear algebra and starting from the basics, including vectors, matrices, eigenvalues, singular values, and least squares. Covers the basics in optimization including convex optimization, linear/quadratic programming, gradient descent, and regularization, building on insights from linear algebra. Explores a variety of applications in science and engineering, where the tools developed give powerful ways to understand complex systems and also extract structure from data.  
 One of14.30**14.30 Introduction to Statistical Methods in Economics**  () Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 4-0-8 Self-contained introduction to probability and statistics with applications in economics and the social sciences. Covers elements of probability theory, statistical estimation and inference, regression analysis, causal inference, and program evaluation. Couples methods with applications and with assignments involving data analysis. Uses basic calculus and matrix algebra. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. May not count toward HASS requirement., 18.600**18.600 Probability and Random Variables**  (,) Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 4-0-8 Probability spaces, random variables, distribution functions. Binomial, geometric, hypergeometric, Poisson distributions. Uniform, exponential, normal, gamma and beta distributions. Conditional probability, Bayes theorem, joint distributions. Chebyshev inequality, law of large numbers, and central limit theorem. Credit cannot also be received for 6.041A or 6.041B., 6.37006.041**6.3700 Introduction to Probability**  (,) Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 Units: 4-0-8 An introduction to probability theory, the modeling and analysis of probabilistic systems, and elements of statistical inference. Probabilistic models, conditional probability. Discrete and continuous random variables. Expectation and conditional expectation, and further topics about random variables. Limit Theorems. Bayesian estimation and hypothesis testing. Elements of classical statistical inference. Bernoulli and Poisson processes. Markov chains. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.  
6.12006.042**6.1200 Mathematics for Computer Science**  (,) (Same subject as 18.062) Prereqs: GIR:CAL1 Units: 5-0-7 Elementary discrete mathematics for science and engineering, with a focus on mathematical tools and proof techniques useful in computer science. Topics include logical notation, sets, relations, elementary graph theory, state machines and invariants, induction and proofs by contradiction, recurrences, asymptotic notation, elementary analysis of algorithms, elementary number theory and cryptography, permutations and combinations, counting tools, and discrete probability.
* Five **computation and algorithms** subjects:  
 One of6.1000**6.1000 Introduction to Programming and Computer Science**  (,) Prereqs: none Units: 4-0-8 Develops foundational skills in programming and in computational modeling. Covers widely used programming concepts in Python, including mutability, function objects, and object-oriented programming. Introduces algorithmic complexity and some common libraries. Throughout, demonstrates using computation to help understand real-world phenomena; topics include optimization problems, building simulations, and statistical modeling. Intended for students with at least some prior exposure to programming. Students with no programming experience are encouraged to take 6.100A and 6.100B (or 16.C20) over two terms., 6.100A6.0001**6.100A Introduction to Computer Science Programming in Python**  (,) Prereqs: none Units: 2-0-4 Introduction to computer science and programming. Students develop skills to program and use computational techniques to solve problems. Topics include: the notion of computation, Python, simple algorithms and data structures, object-oriented programming, testing and debugging, and algorithmic complexity. Lectures are viewed outside of class; in-class time is dedicated to problem-solving and discussion. Combination of 6.100A and 6.100B (or 16.C20) counts as REST subject.  
 One of18.000218.0002 not found in MIT subject catalog, 6.100B6.0002**6.100B Introduction to Computational Thinking and Data Science**  (,) Prereqs: 6.100A or permission of instructor Units: 2-0-4 Provides an introduction to using computation to build models that can be used to help understand real-world phenomena. Topics include optimization problems, simulation models, and statistical models. Requires experience programming in Python as a prerequisite. Combination of 6.100A and 6.100B counts as REST subject., 6.10106.009**6.1010 Fundamentals of Programming**  (,) Prereqs: 6.1000 or (6.100A and (6.100B or 16.C20)) Units: 2-4-6 Introduces fundamental concepts of programming. Designed to develop skills in applying basic methods from programming languages to abstract problems. Topics include programming and Python basics, computational concepts, software engineering, algorithmic techniques, data types, and recursion. Lab component consists of software design, construction, and implementation of design. Enrollment may be limited.  
6.12106.006**6.1210 Introduction to Algorithms**  (,) Prereqs: 6.100A and (6.1200 or (6.120A and (6.3700, 6.3800, 18.05, or 18.600))) Units: 5-0-7 Introduction to mathematical modeling of computational problems, as well as common algorithms, algorithmic paradigms, and data structures used to solve these problems. Emphasizes the relationship between algorithms and programming, and introduces basic performance measures and analysis techniques for these problems. Enrollment may be limited.  
6.12206.046**6.1220 Design and Analysis of Algorithms**  (,) (Same subject as 18.410) Prereqs: 6.1200 and 6.1210 Units: 4-0-8 Techniques for the design and analysis of efficient algorithms, emphasizing methods useful in practice. Topics include sorting; search trees, heaps, and hashing; divide-and-conquer; dynamic programming; greedy algorithms; amortized analysis; graph algorithms; and shortest paths. Advanced topics may include network flow; computational geometry; number-theoretic algorithms; polynomial and matrix calculations; caching; and parallel computing.  
 One of6.39006.036**6.3900 Introduction to Machine Learning**  (,) Prereqs: (6.1000 or 6.1210) and (18.03 or 18.06) Units: 4-0-8 Introduction to the principles and algorithms of machine learning from an optimization perspective. Topics include linear and non-linear models for supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning, with a focus on gradient-based methods and neural-network architectures. Previous experience with algorithms may be helpful., 6.C01**6.C01 Modeling with Machine Learning: from Algorithms to Applications**  () Prereqs/\[Coreqs\]: GIR:CAL2 and 6.100A; \[1.C01, 2.C01, 3.C01, 6.C011, 7.C01, 15.C01, or 22.C01\] Units: 2-0-4 Focuses on modeling with machine learning methods with an eye towards applications in engineering and sciences. Introduction to modern machine learning methods, from supervised to unsupervised models, with an emphasis on newer neural approaches. Emphasis on the understanding of how and why the methods work from the point of view of modeling, and when they are applicable. Using concrete examples, covers formulation of machine learning tasks, adapting and extending methods to given problems, and how the methods can and should be evaluated. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. Students cannot receive credit without completion of a 6-unit disciplinary module in the same semester.&6.C011**6.C011 Modeling with Machine Learning for Computer Science**  () Prereqs: 6.100A, 6.C01, (6.1200 or 6.3700), and (18.06 or 18.C06) Units: 3-0-3 Focuses on in-depth modeling of engineering tasks as machine learning problems. Emphasizes framing, method design, and interpretation of results. In comparison to broader prerequisite 6.C01, this project-oriented subject consists of deep dives into select technical areas or engineering tasks involving both supervised and exploratory uses of machine learning. Explores technical areas such robustness, interpretability, fairness and engineering tasks such as recommender systems, performance optimization, and automated design. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. Students cannot receive credit without completion of the core subject 6.C01\. Enrollment may be limited.
* Three **economics** subjects:  
 One of14.01**14.01 Principles of Microeconomics**  (,) Prereqs: none Units: 3-0-9 Introduces microeconomic concepts and analysis, supply and demand analysis, theories of the firm and individual behavior, competition and monopoly, and welfare economics. Applications to problems of current economic policy., 14.03**14.03 Microeconomic Theory and Public Policy**  (,) Prereqs: 14.01 or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Students master and apply economic theory, causal inference, and contemporary evidence to analyze policy challenges. These include the effect of minimum wages on employment, the value of healthcare, the power and limitations of free markets, the benefits and costs of international trade, the causes and remedies of externalities, the consequences of adverse selection in insurance markets, the impacts of labor market discrimination, and the application of machine learning to supplement to decision-making. Class attendance and participation are mandatory. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.  
14.32**14.32 Econometric Data Science**  (,) Prereqs: 14.30, 15.069, or 18.650 Units: 4-4-4 Introduces regression and other tools for causal inference and descriptive analysis in empirical economics. Topics include analysis of randomized experiments, instrumental variables methods and regression discontinuity designs, differences-in-differences estimation, and regression with time series data. Develops the skills needed to conduct — and critique — empirical studies in economics and related fields. Empirical applications are drawn from published examples and frontier research. Familiarity with statistical programming languages is helpful. Students taking graduate version complete an empirical project leading to a short paper. No listeners. Limited to 70 total for versions meeting together.  
 One of  
| [14.05**14.05 Intermediate Macroeconomics**  () Prereqs: 14.01 and (14.02 or permission of instructor) Units: 4-0-8 Uses the tools of macroeconomics to investigate various macroeconomic issues in depth. Topics range from economic growth and inequality in the long run to economic stability and financial crises in the short run. Surveys many economic models used today. Requires a substantial research paper on the economics of long-run economic growth.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.05)[14.18**14.18 Mathematical Economic Modeling**  () Prereqs: 14.04, 14.12, 14.15, or 14.19 Units: 4-0-8 Guides students through the process of developing and analyzing formal economic models and effectively communicating their results. Topics include decision theory, game theory, voting, and matching. Instruction and practice in oral and written communication provided. Prior coursework in microeconomic theory and/or proof-based mathematics required. Limited to 18 students.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.18)[14.33**14.33 Research and Communication in Economics: Topics, Methods, and Implementation**  (,) Prereqs: 14.32 and (14.01 or 14.02) Units: 3-4-5 Exposes students to the process of conducting independent research in empirical economics and effectively communicating the results of the research. Emphasizes econometric analysis of an assigned economic question and culminates in each student choosing an original topic, performing appropriate analysis, and delivering oral and written project reports. Limited to 20 per section.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.33)[14.35**14.35 Why Markets Fail**  () Prereqs: 14.04, 14.12, 14.15, or 14.19 Units: 4-0-8 Guides students through the process of developing and communicating economic and data analysis. Discusses topics in which markets fail to provide efficient outcomes or economic opportunity. Topics include health insurance, intergenerational mobility, discrimination, climate change, and more. Instruction and practice in oral and written communication provided. Key course activities include the writing of a term paper conducting original economic analysis and an in-class slide presentation of the work. Limited to 18.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.35) |  

* One **computer science elective** subject:  
| [15.053**15.053 Optimization Methods in Business Analytics**  () Prereqs: 1.00, 1.000, 6.100A, or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Introduces optimization methods with a focus on modeling, solution techniques, and analysis. Covers linear programming, network optimization, integer programming, nonlinear programming, and heuristics. Applications to logistics, manufacturing, statistics, machine learning, transportation, game theory, marketing, project management, and finance. Includes projects in which student teams solve optimization problems of practical interest.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=15.053)[6.32606.207**6.3260 Networks**  () (Same subject as 14.15) Prereqs: 6.3700 or 14.30 Units: 4-0-8 Highlights common principles that permeate the functioning of diverse technological, economic and social networks. Utilizes three sets of tools for analyzing networks -- random graph models, optimization, and game theory -- to study informational and learning cascades; economic and financial networks; social influence networks; formation of social groups; communication networks and the Internet; consensus and gossiping; spread and control of epidemics; control and use of energy networks; and biological networks. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.3260)[6.72016.2156.7201 not found in MIT subject catalog](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.7201)[6.C395**6.C395 Algorithmic and Human Decision-Making**  () (Same subject as 14.C395) Prereqs: 6.3700 or ((6.3900 or 6.C01) and (14.30 or 18.600)) Units: 4-0-8 Explores how to design machine learning and AI algorithms that enhance human decision-making and tackle real-world societal challenges. Combines statistical ML frameworks with behavioral economics, focusing on applications in areas such as education, finance, economic mobility, and policy. Emphasizes identifying high-impact problems and building effective, reliable solutions. Students taking the graduate version will complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.C395)[6.C571**6.C571 Optimization Methods**  () (Same subject as 1.C571, 15.C571) Prereqs: 18.C06 or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Introduction to the methods and applications of optimization. Topics include linear optimization, duality, non-linear optimization, integer optimization, and optimization under uncertainty. Instruction provided in modeling techniques to address problems arising in practice, mathematical theory to understand the structure of optimization problems, computational algorithms to solve complex optimization problems, and practical applications. Covers several examples and in-depth case studies based on real-world data to showcase impactful applications of optimization across management and engineering. Computational exercises based on the Julia-based programming language JuMP. Includes a term project. Basic competency in computational programming and linear algebra recommended. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. This subject was previously listed as 6.7201.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.C571) |  

* Three **economics elective** subjects:  
 One from the ECONDS list  
 One from the ECONTH list  
 One from the ECONDS or ECONTH list
* One **communication-intensive** subject:  
15.276**15.276 Communicating with Data**  (,) Prereqs: none Units: 3-0-9 Equips students with the strategies, tactics, and tools to use quantitative information to inform and persuade others. Emphasizes effective communication skills as the foundation of successful careers. Develops the skills to communicate quantitative information in a business context to drive people and organizations toward better decisions. Focuses heavily on the cycle of practicing, reflecting, and revising. Students receive extensive, personalized feedback from teaching team and classmates. Limited to 25., 6.UAR**6.UAR Seminar in Undergraduate Advanced Research**  (,) (Same subject as 2.UAR) Prereqs: Permission of instructor Units: 2-0-4 Instruction in effective undergraduate research, including choosing and developing a research topic, surveying previous work and publications, research topics in EECS and the School of Engineering, industry best practices, design for robustness, technical presentation, authorship and collaboration, and ethics. Students engage in extensive written and oral communication exercises, in the context of an approved advanced research project. A total of 12 units of credit is awarded for completion of the fall and subsequent spring term offerings. Application required; consult EECS SuperUROP website for more information., 6.UAT**6.UAT Oral Communication**  (,) Prereqs: none Units: 3-0-6 Provides instruction in aspects of effective technical oral presentations and exposure to communication skills useful in a workplace setting. Students create, give and revise a number of presentations of varying length targeting a range of different audiences.
_Notes:_ 
* You must follow these requirements
* Includes subjects as of Fall 2026
* Each completed subject can only be used to satisfy at most one _required_ subject but can be used to satisfy multiple _additional constraints_.
* : only offered fall term  
: only offered spring term  
grey: not offered this academic year.
* If your primary major is 6-14, at most three of your economics subjects may count toward the eight-subject HASS requirement.
* 16.0002/18.0002/CSE.01 are acceptable alternatives to 6.0002

### Subject Lists

**ECONDS**: Economics electives in data science  

| [14.20**14.20 Industrial Organization: Competitive Strategy and Public Policy**  () Prereqs: 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Analyzes the current debate over the rise of monopolies, the strategic behavior and performance of firms in imperfectly competitive markets, and the role of competition policy. Topics include monopoly power; pricing, product choice, and innovation decisions by firms in oligopoly markets; static and dynamic measurement of market performance; and incentives in organizations. Requires regular participation in class discussion and teamwork in a competitive strategy game. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.20)[14.27**14.27 Economics of Digitization**  () Prereqs: 14.01 and (6.3700 or 14.30) Units: 4-0-8 Uses theoretical economic models and empirical evidence to help understand the past and likely future impacts that digitization has had on legacy markets and institutions. These models help frame class discussions on e-commerce, search, online advertising, traditional and social media, privacy, platform design, and distance learning, among other topics. Students complete a project, and those taking the graduate version have additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.27)[14.36**14.36 Advanced Econometrics**  () Prereqs: 14.32 or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Advanced treatment of the core empirical strategies used to answer causal questions in applied microeconometric research. Covers extensions and innovations relating to econometric applications of regression, machine learning, instrumental variables, differences-in-differences and event-study models, regression discontinuity designs, synthetic controls, and statistical inference. Students taking graduate version complete an additional assignment. ](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.36)[14.38**14.38 Inference on Causal and Structural Parameters Using ML and AI**  () Prereqs: 14.32 Units: 4-0-8 Provides an applied treatment of modern causal inference with high-dimensional data, focusing on empirical economic problems encountered in academic research and the tech industry. Formulates problems in the languages of structural equation modeling and potential outcomes. Presents state-of-the-art approaches for inference on causal and structural parameters, including de-biased machine learning, synthetic control methods, and reinforcement learning. Introduces tools from machine learning and deep learning developed for prediction purposes, and discusses how to adapt them to learn causal parameters. Emphasizes the applied and practical perspectives. Requires knowledge of mathematical statistics and regression analysis and programming experience in R or Python.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.38)[14.39**14.39 Large-Scale Decision-Making and Inference**  () Prereqs: 14.32 Units: 4-0-8 Covers the use of data to guide decision-making, with a focus on data-rich and high-dimensional environments as are now commonly encountered in both academic and industry applications. Begins with an introduction to statistical decision theory, including Bayesian perspectives. Covers empirical Bayes methods, including related concepts such as false discovery rates, illustrated with economic applications. Requires knowledge of mathematical statistics and regression analysis, as well as programming experience in R or Python. Students taking the graduate version submit additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.39) | [14.390**14.390 Large-Scale Decision-Making and Inference**  () Prereqs: 14.320 Units: 4-0-8 Covers the use of data to guide decision-making, with a focus on data-rich and high-dimensional environments as are now commonly encountered in both academic and industry applications. Begins with an introduction to statistical decision theory, including Bayesian perspectives. Covers empirical Bayes methods, including related concepts such as false discovery rates, illustrated with economic applications. Requires knowledge of mathematical statistics and regression analysis, as well as programming experience in R or Python. Students taking the graduate version submit additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.390)[14.41**14.41 Public Finance and Public Policy**  () Prereqs: 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Explores the role of government in the economy, applying tools of basic microeconomics to answer important policy questions such as government response to global warming, school choice by K-12 students, Social Security versus private retirement savings accounts, government versus private health insurance, setting income tax rates for individuals and corporations. Students taking the graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.41)[14.42**14.42 Environmental Policy and Economics**  () Prereqs: 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Introduces key concepts and recent advances in environmental economics, and explores their application to environmental policy questions. Topics include market efficiency and market failure, methods for valuing the benefits of environmental quality, the proper role of government in the regulation of the environment, environmental policy design, and implementation challenges. Considers international aspects of environmental policy as well, including the economics of climate change, trade and the environment, and environmental challenges in developing countries. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.42)[14.43**14.43 Economics of Energy, Innovation, and Sustainability**  () (Same subject as 15.0201) Prereqs: 14.01 or 15.0111 Units: 3-0-9 Covers energy and environmental market organization and regulation. Explores economic challenges and solutions to transforming energy markets to be more efficient, accessible, affordable, and sustainable. Applies core economic concepts - consumer choice, firm profit maximization, and strategic behavior - to understand when energy and environmental markets work well and when they fail. They also conduct data-driven economic analysis on the trade-offs of real and proposed policy interventions. Topics include renewable generation sources for electricity, energy access in emerging markets, efficiency programs and fuel efficiency standards, transitioning transportation to alternative fuels, measuring damages and adaptation to climate change, and the effect of energy and environmental policy on innovation. Expectations and evaluation criteria differ for students taking graduate version; consult syllabus or instructor for specific details.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.43)[14.44**14.44 Energy Economics and Policy**  () (Same subject as 15.037) Prereqs: 14.01 or 15.0111 Units: 4-0-8 Analyzes business and public policy issues in energy markets and in the environmental markets to which they are closely tied. Examines the economic determinants of industry structure and evolution of competition among firms in these industries. Investigates successful and unsuccessful strategies for entering new markets and competing in existing markets. Industries studied include oil, natural gas, coal, electricity, and transportation. Topics include climate change and environmental policy, the role of speculation in energy markets, the political economy of energy policies, and market power and antitrust. Two team-based simulation games, representing the world oil market and a deregulated electricity market, act to cement the concepts covered in lecture. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments. Limited to 60.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.44) | [14.45**14.45 Climate and Energy in the Global Economy**  () (Same subject as 15.0161) Prereqs: 14.01 or 15.0111 Units: 3-0-9 Provides students with a comprehensive understanding of the challenges, opportunities, and policy responses to the global climate and energy transitions. Discusses the role of energy in world economies, paying particular attention to low- and middle-income countries, as well as the impacts of climate change on those economies. Considers how energy access, cost, reliability, and environmental harm drive or hinder economic growth, the political influences on the energy sector, and the role of energy in mitigating future impacts of climate change. Also discusses global climate solutions, including the role of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change process, trade policy, climate finance, business strategies to reduce emissions, and business strategies to help people adapt to a changing climate. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.45)[14.64**14.64 Labor Economics and Public Policy**  () Prereqs: 14.30 or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Provides an introduction to the labor market, how it functions, and the important role it plays in people's lives. Topics include supply and demand, minimum wages, labor market effects of social insurance and welfare programs, the collective bargaining relationship, discrimination, human capital, and unemployment. Completion of or concurrent enrollment in 14.03 or 14.04, and 14.32 recommended. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.64)[14.75**14.75 Political Economy and Economic Development**  () Prereqs: 14.01, 14.03, or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Explores the relationship between political institutions and economic development, covering key theoretical issues as well as recent empirical evidence. Topics include colonialism and its legacy, voting, vote buying, media, social media, corruption, and war. Discusses not just what we know on these topics, but how we know it, covering how to craft a good empirical study or field experiment and how to discriminate between reliable and unreliable statistical evidence. Some basic familiarity with probability and/or statistics is useful for this class. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.75)[14.76**14.76 Firms, Markets, Trade and Growth**  () Prereqs: 14.01 and (14.30 or permission of instructor) Units: 4-0-8 Examines how industrial development and international trade have brought about rapid growth and large-scale reductions in poverty for some developing countries, while globalization has simply increased inequality and brought little growth for others. Also considers why, in yet other developing countries, firms remain small-scale and have not integrated with global supply chains. Draws on both theoretical models and empirical evidence to better understand the reasons for these very different experiences and implications for policy. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.76)[15.780**15.780 Analytics of Operations Management**  () Prereqs: 6.3700, 15.069, or permission of instructor Units: 3-0-9 Introduces core concepts in data-driven modeling that inform and optimize business decisions under uncertainty. Covers models and frameworks, such as machine learning, time series forecasting, dynamic programming, stochastic optimization, and multi-armed bandits. Draws on real-world applications, with several examples from retail, healthcare, logistics, supply chain, and public sector.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=15.780) |

  
**ECONTH**: Economics electives in theory  

| [14.04**14.04 Intermediate Microeconomic Theory**  () Prereqs: GIR:CAL2 and 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Analysis of consumer and producer decisions including analysis of competitive and monopolistic markets. Price-based partial and general equilibrium analysis. Introduction to game theory as a foundation for the strategic analysis of economic situations. Imperfect competition, dynamic games among firms. Failures of general equilibrium theory and their resolutions: externalities, public goods, incomplete information settings, signaling, screening, insurance, alternative market mechanisms, auctions, design of markets.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.04)[14.12**14.12 Economic Applications of Game Theory**  () Prereqs: 14.01 and (6.041B, 14.04, 14.30, 18.05, or permission of instructor) Units: 4-0-8 Analysis of strategic behavior in multi-person economic settings. Introduction to solution concepts, such as rationalizability, backwards induction, Nash equilibrium, subgame-perfect equilibrium, and sequential equilibrium. Strong emphasis on dynamic games, such as repeated games. Introduction to Bayesian games, focusing on Bayesian Nash Equilibrium, Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium, and signaling games. Applications drawn from microeconomics: imperfect competition, implicit cartels, bargaining, and auctions.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.12)[14.13**14.13 Psychology and Economics**  () Prereqs: 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Introduces the theoretical and empirical literature of behavioral economics. Examines important and systematic departures from the standard models in economics by incorporating insights from psychology and other social sciences. Covers theory and evidence on time, risk, and social preferences; beliefs and learning; emotions; limited attention; and frames, defaults, and nudges. Studies applications to many different areas, such as credit card debt, procrastination, retirement savings, addiction, portfolio choice, poverty, labor supply, happiness, and government policy. Students participate in surveys and experiments in class, review evidence from lab experiments, examine how the results can be integrated into models, and test models using field and lab data. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.13)[14.16**14.16 Strategy and Information**  () Prereqs: 14.01 or permission of instructor Units: 4-0-8 Covers modern applications of game theory where incomplete information plays an important role. Applications include bargaining, auctions, global games, market design, information design, and network economics. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.16)[14.17**14.17 Blockchain and Financial System Design**  () Prereqs: 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Synthesizes computer science technologies underlying cryptocurrency, blockchain, tokenization, platforms, and computational algorithms with economics and its use of contracts, mechanism design, general equilibrium, and monetary theory. Topics include: legacy systems in developed and developing economies; technological change; the impact of distributed ledgers, smart contracts, and encryption; the optimal allocation of risk; market structure; and optimized regulation. Explores new financial designs for industry, digital companies, central banks, and international organizations. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.17) | [14.19**14.19 Market Design**  () Prereqs: 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Covers the design and operation of organized markets, building on ideas from microeconomic and game theory. Topics may include mechanism design, auctions, matching markets, and other resource allocation problems.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.19)[14.26**14.26 Organizational Economics**  () (Same subject as 15.039) Prereqs: 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Provides a rigorous, but not overly technical introduction to the economic theory of organization together with a varying set of applications. Addresses incentives, control, relationships, decision processes, and organizational culture and performance. Introduces selected fundamentals of game theory. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.26)[14.54**14.54 International Trade**  () Prereqs: 14.01 Units: 4-0-8 Provides an introduction to theoretical and empirical topics in international trade. Offers a brief history of globalization. Introduces the theory of comparative advantage and discusses its implications for international specialization and wage inequality. Studies the determinants and consequences of trade policy, and analyzes the consequences of immigration and foreign direct investment. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=14.54)[6.32606.207**6.3260 Networks**  () (Same subject as 14.15) Prereqs: 6.3700 or 14.30 Units: 4-0-8 Highlights common principles that permeate the functioning of diverse technological, economic and social networks. Utilizes three sets of tools for analyzing networks -- random graph models, optimization, and game theory -- to study informational and learning cascades; economic and financial networks; social influence networks; formation of social groups; communication networks and the Internet; consensus and gossiping; spread and control of epidemics; control and use of energy networks; and biological networks. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.](http://student.mit.edu/catalog/search.cgi?search=6.3260) |